docs/api/overview.md, before:

# External API & ML Integration Overview

This package defines **interfaces only** for connecting LabOS to external model
providers. No network clients or vendor SDKs are included. Future implementers
should provide concrete subclasses that satisfy these contracts while keeping
all side-effects isolated from LabOS core modules.

## Interfaces

- `AbstractModelClient`: Minimal contract for submitting generic prediction
  payloads and returning a normalized `ModelPrediction` object.
- `ExternalSpectrumPredictor`: Specialization for spectrum generation or peak
  prediction, using a structured `SpectrumRequest` input.
- `ExternalPropertyPredictor`: Specialization for molecular property
  predictions powered by `PropertyRequest` inputs.

## Implementation Guidance

1. **Keep dependencies local**: Place vendor-specific code in a separate module
   that imports the interfaces from `labos.api`. Do not add transport libraries
   to LabOS core.
2. **Normalize I/O**: Validate inputs, map provider responses into
   `ModelPrediction`, and preserve any provider payloads in `raw_response` for
   auditability.
3. **Error handling**: Raise `ModelClientError` for validation, serialization,
   and provider rejections. Use `ModelTimeoutError` when a call exceeds a caller
   supplied or default timeout. Expose more granular subclasses only if they
   inherit from `ModelClientError`.
4. **Resource management**: Implement `close()` to release sessions or sockets.
   Make it safe to call multiple times.
5. **Provenance**: Populate `model_name`, `request_id`, and `metadata` so jobs
   and audit logs can trace predictions back to the underlying provider and
   configuration.

## Usage Sketch

```python
from labos.api import ExternalPropertyPredictor, PropertyRequest

class ExamplePropertyClient(ExternalPropertyPredictor):
    def predict(self, *, inputs, tags=None, timeout_s=None):
        ...  # translate generic inputs to provider call

    def predict_properties(self, request: PropertyRequest, *, timeout_s=None):
        ...  # convert request to provider payload and wrap response

    def close(self):
        ...  # close sessions
```

Implementations should include their own lightweight validation to prevent
malformed requests from reaching external services and to ensure audit logs stay
consistent across providers.

Commit message:

Add stub adapters for external predictors

docs/api/overview.md, after:

# External API & ML Integration Overview

This package defines **interfaces only** for connecting LabOS to external model
providers. No network clients or vendor SDKs are included. Future implementers
should provide concrete subclasses that satisfy these contracts while keeping
all side-effects isolated from LabOS core modules.

## Interfaces

- `AbstractModelClient`: Minimal contract for submitting generic prediction
  payloads and returning a normalized `ModelPrediction` object.
- `ExternalSpectrumPredictor`: Specialization for spectrum generation or peak
  prediction, using a structured `SpectrumRequest` input.
- `ExternalPropertyPredictor`: Specialization for molecular property
  predictions powered by `PropertyRequest` inputs.

## Stub Adapters (Phase 2.5.3)

- `DummySpectrumPredictor` and `DummyPropertyPredictor` implement the above
  interfaces but immediately raise `NotImplementedError` with a clear message.
- Factory helpers (`get_default_spectrum_predictor`,
  `get_default_property_predictor`) return these stubs so callers can depend on
  stable shapes without performing any external calls.
- No endpoints, tokens, or vendor SDKs are bundled; these classes exist solely
  to preserve API contracts until real integrations are supplied.

## Implementation Guidance

1. **Keep dependencies local**: Place vendor-specific code in a separate module
   that imports the interfaces from `labos.api`. Do not add transport libraries
   to LabOS core.
2. **Normalize I/O**: Validate inputs, map provider responses into
   `ModelPrediction`, and preserve any provider payloads in `raw_response` for
   auditability.
3. **Error handling**: Raise `ModelClientError` for validation, serialization,
   and provider rejections. Use `ModelTimeoutError` when a call exceeds a caller
   supplied or default timeout. Expose more granular subclasses only if they
   inherit from `ModelClientError`.
4. **Resource management**: Implement `close()` to release sessions or sockets.
   Make it safe to call multiple times.
5. **Provenance**: Populate `model_name`, `request_id`, and `metadata` so jobs
   and audit logs can trace predictions back to the underlying provider and
   configuration.

## Usage Sketch

```python
from labos.api import ExternalPropertyPredictor, PropertyRequest

class ExamplePropertyClient(ExternalPropertyPredictor):
    def predict(self, *, inputs, tags=None, timeout_s=None):
        ...  # translate generic inputs to provider call

    def predict_properties(self, request: PropertyRequest, *, timeout_s=None):
        ...  # convert request to provider payload and wrap response

    def close(self):
        ...  # close sessions
```

Implementations should include their own lightweight validation to prevent
malformed requests from reaching external services and to ensure audit logs stay
consistent across providers. Future phases will replace the dummy adapters with
real clients configured via environment variables or configuration files.
